Not much sewing left here,
but what's there I can go ahead and cut
from the outside . . . just make it a little easier
to pull it from the inside.
You see how loose it is already,
and you can see the tears
where the folds have come apart as well.
Again, we have these pages numbered now,
so I will be trying to pay a little bit of attention
to where the center of the signature fold is . . .
of the section . . . so how many . . .
essentially how many leaves there are in each section.
It'll make it a little easier
when I'm putting the section back together
to know which leaves are conjugate
with the pages on the other side.
[Interviewer]: So the goal is
to have the gathers be identical?
[Campbell]: Yes . . . or like they were originally.
So here one, two, three, four, five.
Okay, so that looks like these were five sheets
folded around each other, so it's a signature . . .
or the section is made up of 10 leaves or 20 pages,
and then sure enough this leaf here,
which you might confuse
for a leaf that goes to this section
and conjugate with one of these over here,
you can see here that it's still
attached to its conjugate sheet,
which is at the back of this signature.
That gets a little confusing at times
because of the adhesives.
You know, when the spine is lined,
and the pages get stuck together,
and the outer folds are actually
held more tightly together
than the pages within the folds.
[Interviewer]: Right. And it looked as though
the page was creased in a way
that would maybe make you think
it was connected to a different page . . .
or the leaf was creased.
[Campbell]:See now here,
this is a little deceiving here.
It's connected and you think okay,
is that leaf conjugate with that?
Actually, there's no way because this is . . .
they wouldn't be conjugate without sewing in between them,
and without other pages in between them.
What's holding them together is the glue from the spine,
which is what I was just talking about.
So, basically, to get this page back to where it belongs,
you have to do that
so you end up with a full section right here,
and there is the outer fold barely there,
and then the next.
The inner folds are in pretty good shape,
which is good, and in fact the sewing holes
are in very good shape.
We'll probably just use the original sewing holes
and not have to worry about very fragile paper there,
and this is probably, in most cases,
throughout this book, this is probably
the only fold that will need to be
mended before it is resewn.
[Interviewer]: So if you can avoid piercing the paper again,
you will, when you sew it.
[Campbell]: Sometimes with real brittle paper
or very delicate paper, it is almost better
to make a new hole,
especially if there's some support on the outside,
some repairs that you've done on the outside,
but in a case like this it's definitely better
just to go with the original sewing holes.
It's connected here, so...
here's the last leaf of this section right here,
and I'm just going to pop it
away from this adhesive here . . .
and there it is.
It is still quite flexible
and pretty robust for what it is,
but still, the linen itself, the fibers,
don't really last forever.
It's like old clothing.
I've seen some tests of certain fibers and bookbinding cloths
-that sort of thing-comparing linen and cotton
that seem to show that cotton is actually more durable
in a long run.
It will last longer and hold up more,
so the long-term endurance. . . .
Again, I'm getting ready to separate this here,
and that . . . that . . .
the reason these are together right here . . .
is the adhesive from the . . . when the spine was . . .
after it was sewn it was glued up,
and the leather was put on, and that adhesive
got down in between the sections a little bit
and basically glues them together.
It's sort of consolidates the spine,
and we still use adhesives that way.
I have a different light here. Is that . . .
[Interviewer]: That's fine.
[Campbell]: Okay. Good.
We're down to the very end.
[Interviewer]: So how many gathers were there?
[Campbell]: I think ten, but let me count again real quick.
Oh, no. Two, four, six, eight. Yes.
And there are 166- including the paste downs-166 pages.